GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away.
Tonight on the "NewsHour":
Explosive wildfires rage out of
control in California, forcing
thousands to flee, and scorching
entire blocks of homes.
Also ahead: European governments
gather to grapple with the
refugee crisis. As thousands
more continue to flood the
borders, some countries begin to
set new limits.
Plus, Miles O'Brien reports on
the race to find an Ebola
vaccine, this time to save the
lives of gorillas
and chimpanzees.
PETER WALSH, University of
Cambridge: I don't really like
to see chimps in a cage. It kind
of upsets me a little bit. But I
weigh the individual welfare of
those chimpanzees against
the survival of
wild chimpanzees.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: A firestorm roared
across Northern California
today, leaving at least 400
homes
in ruins and one person dead.
The Valley Fire has swept across
95 square miles north of
the Napa Valley region. And
southeast of Sacramento, the
Butte Fire has burned another
135 homes.
Between them, the two fires have
forced 23,000 people out of
their homes, and left crews
struggling to hold the line.
Middletown, California was an
ashy, gray ghost town today. The
Valley Fire that exploded
over the weekend didn't
discriminate. Cars, homes,
parking structures all burned to
a
crisp.
WOMAN: It was a wall of fire
behind us when we left, scariest
thing ever. I -- I am still
in shock.
GWEN IFILL: That wall of fire
moved down from the mountains on
Saturday afternoon and burned
out of control in all
directions. More than 1,400
firefighters faced the worst
possible
conditions: a brutal drought
that's has turned trees and
brush into tinderboxes, combined
with blistering heat
and high winds.
GOV. JERRY BROWN (D),
California: This is damn serious
stuff. Firefighters have to be
careful, but so do people who
live out in their cabins or
their homes. They have to
leave when they get the word.
This is not just this year. This
is the future from now
on. It's going to get worse.
GWEN IFILL: The area is full of
horse farms. And many of the
animals were left behind,
as owners fled with
little warning.
MARK GHILARDUCCI, Director,
Governor's Office of Emergency
Services: In the case of the
Valley Fire, we have roughly
13,000 individuals that have
been displaced. Up on the Butte
Fire, we have at least 10,000
that have been displaced. These
communities still are in
an active firefight.
GWEN IFILL: Not quite 200 miles
away, the Butte Fire flared up
last Wednesday and has
burned across 110 square miles,
and scores more homes. It's 30
percent contained. Firefighters
hope for help from the weather
as a low-pressure system moves
in and possibly brings showers
in the next few days.
In Afghanistan, Taliban fighters
stormed a prison, allowing 355
prisoners to escape.
A suicide car bomber breached
the main gate of the facility in
Ghazni, and Taliban fighters
attacked troops who tried to
rush in to help. At least four
guards and four militants were
killed.
Security forces in Egypt
attacked a convoy of Mexican
tourists today, killing a dozen
people and wounding 10. It
happened near an oasis in
Egypt's Western Desert. The
convoy
was hit by air and ground fire.
Officials said a military and
police force had been
chasing Islamist militants, and
mistook the target -- that
tourists, that is, for their
target. Mexico condemned the
attack and called for a full
investigation.
There's been another political
change down under. Conservative
Prime Minister Tony Abbott
was ousted today by members of
his own party amid falling
support and worries about the
economy. Instead, they chose
Malcolm Turnbull as the new
prime minister, the country's
fourth
leader in just over two years.
MALCOLM TURNBULL, Australian
Prime Minister-Elect: The
Australia of the future has to
be a nation
that is agile, that is
innovative, that is creative. We
cannot be defensive. We cannot
future-proof ourselves. We have
to recognize that the disruption
that we see driven by
technology, the volatility and
change is our friend, is our
friend, if we are agile and
smart enough to take
advantage of it.
GWEN IFILL: Abbott drew
international attention last
year with a drive to repeal
Australia's
carbon tax and instead pay
industry to operate more
cleanly. Turnbull gave no
indication
that he will seek to
change that policy.
Back in this country, a judge in
South Carolina refused bond for
Michael Slager, a former
policeman accused of murdering
an unarmed suspect. Slager faces
a murder charge in the
death of Walter Scott. Video
showed him firing eight times
after Scott ran from a traffic
stop. Slager wanted to be
released from jail pending his
trial.
Kim Davis returned to work as
Rowan County clerk in Kentucky.
She spent five days in
jail for refusing marriage
licenses for same-sex couples,
citing her religious beliefs.
Today,
deputies in her office went
ahead and issued licenses, and
Davis didn't interfere. She
said an impossible choice
had been forced on her.
KIM DAVIS, Rowan County,
Kentucky, Clerk: I don't want to
have this conflict, I don't
want to be in the spotlight, and
I certainly don't want to be a
whipping post. I am no
hero. I am just a person who has
been transformed by the grace of
God and who wants to work
and be with my family. I just
want to serve my neighbors
quietly without violating my
conscience.
GWEN IFILL: Davis and her
lawyers argue the licenses will
not be valid without her
signature.
But Kentucky's governor,
attorney general and the county
attorney say they are.
And on Wall Street today, stocks
weren't able to hold on to early
gains, in the face of
more signs of slowing growth in
China. Instead, the Dow Jones
industrial average lost 62
points
to close at 16370. The Nasdaq
fell 16 points. And the S&P 500
dropped eight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
European governments gather to
grapple with the refugee
crisis; a new report on the
lessons learned from Ferguson,
and much more.
Tens of thousands of refugees
and migrants continued their
long journeys today in Europe,
as the continent's leaders met
to chart a path forward and the
two-decade-old free travel
policy among European Union
nations was put on hold.
From Izmir, Turkey, special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant
reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Interior
ministers from across Europe
arrived in Brussels with a quota
plan
on the table to spread 160,000
asylum-seekers across the
continent.
The E.U. did agree on relocating
40,000 migrants, but felt short
of consensus on a more
comprehensive
plan.
DIMITRIS AVRAMOPOULOS, European
Union Migration Commissioner:
But for our proposal on 120,000,
we didn't hear the agreement we
wanted. A majority of the member
states are ready to
move forward, but not all. The
commission is determined to take
action. We will need
another council meeting
in the coming days.
This has always been how Europe
works. When we do not succeed
the first time, yes, we
try again. The world is watching
us. It is time for each and
every one to take their
responsibilities.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But others,
especially those in the poorer
states of Eastern Europe, balked
at any talk of quotas.
MAN: We think that quotas is not
the solution. And we have to
help the countries which are
most affected by these
huge flows of migrants.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But, amid the
debate in Brussels, Europe's
system of no borders began to
crumble.
On Sunday, Germany imposed
stricter border controls and
sent in more police to step up
screening. Foreign Minister
Frank-Walter Steinmeier said his
government remains committed to
the
effort, but needs help.
FRANK-WALTER STEINMEIER, German
Foreign Minister (through
translator): We stand by our
responsibility,
and will continue to do so, but
we must also make sure that we
keep our own shop in order.
Germany clearly cannot manage
this burden alone. We must
introduce a real
responsibility-sharing.
If everybody takes on their fair
share, then the burden will be
manageable for everybody.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The German move
caused traffic backups at the
border with Austria, and set
off a chain reaction along the
route the migrants take to get
to Germany. In Austria, the
government
added its own controls along
the border with Hungary.
Some 14,000 refugees entered
Austria on Sunday alone, and at
least 7,000 more came today,
before officials moved to stem
the flow. And Hungary's
conservative government stepped
up its own aggressive efforts.
Crews raced to complete a fence
along the border with
Serbia, and troops deployed to
seal off unfinished portions.
Tomorrow, new laws in Hungary
will
allow police to jail anyone
trying to enter the country
illegally.
Meanwhile, in Turkey, refugees
waiting in Izmir watched the
developments across Europe
with foreboding. The port city
is one of the staging posts
feeding into the human smuggling
racket. It's an expensive and
often perilous journey to the
Greek islands, not far away
for the many here in the
district of Basmane. They are
mainly Syrians, sleeping where
they
can, in squalid,
unsanitary conditions.
These sleeping represent just a
fraction of the tens of
thousands of refugees who have
gathered on Turkey's
Mediterranean coastline hoping
to get to Europe. Some children
were
up early on a day when the winds
and seas were said to be
favorable for the voyage.
In the mosque in the main
square, where many -- the
European Union to open the land
borders
between Turkey, Greece and
Bulgaria to put an end to the
drownings that have claimed
thousands.
MAN (through translator): One
important thing regarding our
Turkish brothers who deal with
Arab countries, migrants and
those who seek asylum to these
European countries, finish
your good deed. See all these
families with your own eyes. For
Turkey, America, and the
E.U., all the countries that
demand human rights, open the
crossing. Why would children
suffer? Families are incurring
debts to come here and cross,
and some drown.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As she sat with
her grandchildren in the shade
in the mosque, Rahme Habul, from
Aleppo in Syria, was unaware
that European countries were
hastily fortifying their
frontiers.
She says three of her sons were
kidnapped and murdered by the
regime of Syrian President
Bashar al-Assad.
RAHME HABUL, Refugee (through
translator): I intend to go from
my country, Syria, to
Germany or any destination you
take us. I don't know. I think
God would oversee this.
God chose to take my kids. They
killed them. They told me they
grinded them in a cement
factory and left them
there. Why? For what?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Some European
politicians have said there's no
need for the Syrians
to leave Turkey, where they are
now safe from war. But living
conditions in the makeshift
camps there are grim. And some
of the refugees are concerned
that if they make it across
the sea to Greece, they will get
stuck on the wrong side of the
fence being erected
by Hungary.
MAN (through translator): We
have heard that Hungary is
closing the borders in the face
of Syrians. Is this news true or
not? We demand that the barbed
wires be removed and facilitate
their transportation.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The European
Union may be talking about how
to accommodate 160,000 refugees
and migrants in an orderly
fashion, but all the indications
are that that is a completely
unrealistic figure.
And later this week in Turkey,
there is going to be an attempt
to test the resolve of Europe
to protect its outer limits;
3,000 people are planning to
march from Istanbul to Edirne,
which is where the Greek and
Bulgarian borders meet. What
they want to do is to open the
gates of Europe and put an
end to the sea crossings.
The refugees here are
desperately hoping that they
succeed. And if they do, it
could divide
a very fractious
Europe still further.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Malcolm Brabant in Izmir,
Turkey.
GWEN IFILL: So, how much will
today's decisions in Brussels
help ease the migrant crisis and
the rest of Europe?
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: And with us is
Hungary's ambassador to the
United States, Reka Szemerkenyi,
and
from the Greek island of Lesbos,
former British Foreign Secretary
David Miliband, now president
and CEO of the International
Rescue Committee.
And, Ambassador, let
me start with you.
At the meeting today in
Brussels, an U.N. official spoke
of a heated debate, of the
majority of countries wanting to
move forward, but some
countries, including Hungary, I
gather,
still against a
quota system. Why?
REKA SZEMERKENYI, Hungarian
Ambassador to the United States:
The quota system is one
that really doesn't help
in solving the situation.
What we can see in Hungary is an
unprecedented wave of migration
and that is really a dramatic
shock to the world country, and
I think it's a dramatic shock to
the whole continent.
What we could see is also a
major need of basic humanitarian
needs, and what we could
see from the Hungarian society
-- I just got back from Hungary
a few days ago -- is a massive
wave of response for the
immediate humanitarian needs of
these people coming into the
country.
We have been providing food,
shelter, medication, even
schooling for the children of
the migrant
families entering Hungarian
soil, but, unfortunately,
sympathy is not enough. We have
to move beyond.
JEFFREY BROWN: But the E.U. as
a whole has not moved beyond.
Let me ask David Miliband.
What was your reaction to the
seeming stalemate still today?
DAVID MILIBAND, Former British
Foreign Secretary: I think that
Europe has been very late to
get a grip with this crisis, and
it's vital that big and bold
decisions are taken by the
European Union.
After all, there are 2,000 to
3,000 people arriving every day
in Lesbos, the island off
of Greece that has borne about
half of the refugees entering
Europe. I think it's vital
that we both tackle the symptoms
of this problem, which are the
unprecedented surge that the
ambassador speaks out, with
proper humanitarian help,
coordinated across the European
Union
with competence, as well as
compassion, and that we also
tackle the problem at source,
because organizations like mine
are not just working here in
Europe.
We're also working in Syria,
Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan,
whose societies are creaking
under
the strain of a civil war
that seems to be without end.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, Ambassador,
you speak of the need for more
humanitarian help. At
the same time, your government
has gone even further, though,
in announcing a zero tolerance
policy for further allowing
refugee -- at the border for
refugees or migrants.
Why go even further? What
happens to those people that
come to your border now?
REKA SZEMERKENYI: The Hungarian
border is one that has been
receiving the most impressive
and biggest shock of migration
coming into continental Europe
on vital land.
And what we could see is that
the response to this massive
pressure has been, on one
hand, the expression of empathy
and sympathy towards the
migrants, trying to provide them
whatever is needed, down to baby
strollers for the families and
immediate help for the
women and children
coming into the country.
At the same time, what we also
focused on is the establishment
of the security for the
rest of the continent. We live
up to our promises and we live
up to the commitments that we
made to the rest of the European
Union countries in defending the
territory and in providing
security for all of us.
What we try to do is to make as
clear that we follow all the
Schengen requirements to
provide for the registration of
these refugees and migrants. At
the same time, what we're
trying to do is to go through
the exact procedure that is what
we have undertaken.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're referring
to the agreements over the
borders.
But, at the same time, your
country has been hit by a lot of
criticism for an insensitivity
to the refugee situation. Your
prime minister of course got
criticized after he spoke of
working to keep
Europe Christian.
What is your response to that
criticism that has hit Hungary?
REKA SZEMERKENYI: What I have
seen is a massive outflow of
sympathy and support for the
migrants.
What many Hungarian volunteers
have shown was giving their free
time day and night to
work for the migrants, providing
them the necessary help, both in
food and medication,
as well as includes blankets and
sleeping bags for the stay --
their stay in Hungary.
What we have seen is a very
clear experience of sympathy
towards these people.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Miliband,
you spoke of Europe needing to
take faster and bigger action.
And yet right now, what we're
seeing is more countries taking
action to close their borders.
So what is the way
forward? What do you see?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think that we
have seen extraordinary
leadership from Germany, backed
up in a way by France,
Italy and Belgium.
I think there is progress with
Poland. I don't think anyone
doubts that the Hungarian people
are full of generosity. No one
is saying that the Hungarian
people are as misguided and
shortsighted as the decision of
a government which seems to
believe that building a wall
is an answer to a
refugee crisis.
This is of course especially
ironic, given that, in 1956,
when Soviet tanks rolled into
Budapest, 200,000 Hungarians
went into Austria and were
welcomed as refugees. I think
it's
absolutely vital that Europe is
able to show that it can handle
what, after all, is a small
percentage of the
European population.
If there are 500,000 refugees in
a continent of 500 million
people, your viewers can
immediately
do the math and see that this is
a question of management, not of
a continent being overwhelmed.
Equally, it's absolutely vital
that we don't simply bottle up
the problem, either in
individual
European countries like Greece
or Italy, which have been
buckling under the strain, or in
Serbia, which is the next-door
neighbor of Hungary.
And the decision simply to build
a fence and hope for the best,
I'm afraid, is going to
create a tinderbox in Serbia.
JEFFREY BROWN: Madam Ambassador,
your response to that, the
charge that building a wall is
not the -- not the answer here?
REKA SZEMERKENYI: Our common
European space and open internal
borders are really predicated
on the premise that common
external borders are secure.
This is the commitment that we
undertook and this is the
commitment that we're living up
to.
Obviously, it's all in our --
everybody's interest in the
European Union itself to secure
our borders. The border control
and the border -- registration
at the border stations is
a requirement that helps us to
ensure everybody, all our
friends within the European
Union
in the neighboring countries,
that they can count on us, that
we provide for their security
and we take our responsibility
very seriously.
We have made that commitment and
we live up to that commitment.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Miliband,
finally, you're there in Lesbos.
What are you seeing in terms
of the continuing flow of
refugees and migrants? You
expect the numbers to continue?
DAVID MILIBAND: You can probably
see behind me shadows. These are
people who are sleeping
in the port, waiting
for ferries tomorrow.
My organization, the
International Rescue Committee,
has been trying to provide basic
water and sanitation and
humanitarian help, including
some transport for people who,
when
they land in the north of the
island, are expected to make a
40-kilometer walk.
This is women, children,
families, as well as able-bodied
young men. And I think that
the message to Europeans, but
also frankly to the United
States, is a very simple one.
The Syrian crisis is now a
global refugee crisis with
global responsibilities that
need
to attend to all nations.
That means that, in Europe,
there needs to be some
significant shift in policy, but
also,
frankly, the U.S., which so far
has only taken about 1,500
refugees from Syria over the
course
of four years, need to live up
to its historic standard-setting
role as a leader of refugee
resettlement.
We have got to tackle this at
both ends of the problem, the
immediate symptoms of crisis,
the humanitarian crisis, but
also the deeper political causes
in the Middle East. That's
the only way to build the kind
of security that the ambassador
has rightly spoken of.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, David
Miliband and Ambassador Reka
Szemerkenyi, thank you both
very much.
REKA SZEMERKENYI: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The push and pull of
2016 politics in recent weeks
have devolved into name-calling,
counterpunches and
bitter accusation.
Lost in all of that, some of the
candidates have actually been
talking about policy, from
taxes to foreign policy
to income inequality.
We explore some of that and
preview Wednesday's second big
Republican debate this Politics
Monday.
I'm joined by Susan Page of USA
Today and Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report.
Ladies, let's start by talking
about Bernie Sanders, who today
was at Liberty University,
conservative Christian school in
South Carolina, and he was
making the case that, in fact,
the income inequality that he
talks about in his speeches is
actually a moral issue.
Let's listen to a
little bit of it.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: There is
no justice when, in recent
years,
we have seen a proliferation of
millionaires and billionaires,
while at the same time the
United States of America has the
highest rate of childhood
poverty of any major country
on Earth.
GWEN IFILL: It should be said
there was some pushback at
Liberty, which, by the way, is
Virginia, not South Carolina.
There was some pushback, in
which people said, well, what
about abortion? We consider
caring for children to also be
about children, children's
issues
and equality issues.
So what was Bernie
Sanders up to, Susan?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today: I think this
is such a smart thing. I think
politicians are so wise to go to
places that are not their
natural audiences and make their
case.
I mean, what could be more
appealing, and what could we
possibly need more in our
politics
than people who are willing to
talk to people who disagree with
them? He was making a -- he
did go there with a point to
make, though. There are probably
not six votes for Bernie
Sanders in the student body at
Liberty University, but he was
making the case that caring for
people, the biblical injunction
to take care of the neediest
among us, is something that
applies to the case he's trying
to make in terms of a liberal
economic policy.
AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: Yes.
And it's not just that he was
willing to go into the lion's
den, so to speak, somewhere
that is not going to be
naturally looking to vote for
somebody like Bernie Sanders,
but it also highlights this
authenticity that Bernie Sanders
is really taking and doing
a lot with.
And I think it's part of the
reason that you have seen him do
so well in the polls, is
that people see him as somebody
that's really -- he's got a
message. He goes anywhere. He
doesn't care where that is
and gives that same message.
GWEN IFILL: He didn't back down.
AMY WALTER: And will not back
down on any of that. And there
is something that is incredibly
appealing about that.
SUSAN PAGE: And he acknowledged
their differences.
AMY WALTER: That's right. He
said, we're not going to agree
on...
(CROSSTALK)
SUSAN PAGE: He acknowledged that
they differed on issues like
same-sex marriage and abortion.
That doesn't mean that they
can't have a conversation about
the issues that face the
country.
GWEN IFILL: And then it ended
with a prayer with his
interviewer on the Rosh
Hashanah,a
Jewish -- he is Jewish -- at a
Christian university, praying
for the future of the world. So,
maybe
that's the way it ought to be.
Let's move on to Hillary
Clinton, who gave a speech today
about sexual assault on campus,
in which she's trying also to
stay on policy. But even as she
focuses on policy, on issues
which draw attention to what she
sees as her strengths, we see a
new poll today. And in
this new poll, it shows, in the
past eight weeks, Hillary
Clinton has dropped from 71
percent approval among
Democratic women down to 42
percent.
That's a big drop. What's going
on with Hillary Clinton?
AMY WALTER: Well, and that's
why, this week, actually the
next two weeks, are dubbed women
for Hillary.
So this event on campus rape
follows -- she had an appearance
with Ellen DeGeneres. She's
talking about her speech she had
in 1994 where she talked about
women's rights being human
rights at the U.N., and really
trying to remind women voters
about the fact that she is a
historic candidate, would be
obviously the first woman to be
president.
Hillary Clinton has enjoyed the
support of women without ever
making the case for why
it would be important to be a
female candidate. But we're
seeing here flashes of 2008 as
well,
which is, one, it's difficult to
make the case purely on a gender
basis for why Hillary
Clinton should be elected. She's
not necessarily comfortable
doing that, doesn't want to be
just seen as a gender candidate.
And the second is that even
female voters are looking for
other -- something else in
the other candidates. This is
where the authenticity, being
different, being different on
some of
the issues in the way
that Bernie Sanders...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: She clearly knows
that she's in some sort of
trouble.
I want to move to the
Republicans, Susan, because we
know that Trump has been the big
shadow over all of this case.
But we have seen Jeb Bush giving
a speech about -- about
income -- I mean, about taxes.
We have seen Scott Walker
talking about labor unions. We
have actually seen these
candidates trying to talk about
these issues.
But one of the ones that seems
to have taken hold, speaking of
women voters, was with Carly
Fiorina, who has been coming up
somewhat in the polls, when
Donald Trump said that -- gave
an interview to "Rolling Stone"
in which he said: Look at that
face. Would you vote for
that face?
She responded with this ad, of
which we will show you a little
bit in part.
CARLY FIORINA (R), Presidential
Candidate: Look at this face and
look at all of your
faces, the face of leadership,
the face of leadership in our
party, the party of women's
suffrage.
GWEN IFILL: And at end, she ends
up saying, and this is what a
61-year-old face looks
like, wrinkles and all.
Is this her attempt to go for
the same folks that Hillary
Clinton is also trying to go
for?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, it's
brilliant. I think it's like the
best ad of the cycle, not that
there have been so many, in that
she took something that was
meant as a slur and that
she could have taken offense at
and called him on for sexism,
and said she turned it
to her advantage and she
made this very effective ad.
I will be very curious to see
what she does in the debate
Wednesday night, when she makes
it on stage of the top tier of
candidates. She has been a very
interesting candidate,
in that she sits in the outsider
mold of the people who are doing
well.
If you look at the top two
Republicans in the
ABC/Washington Post poll, who
got 53 percent
of the support of Republicans
between them, they're both --
neither of them have been
elected anything ever, Trump and
Dr. Carson. Add that -- Fiorina,
that, clearly, this is
a year in which there is a
willingness to consider folks
that we would not traditionally
have considered qualified to
be considered for president.
GWEN IFILL: Is that the secret,
perhaps, to out-Trumping Trump,
my newest favorite phrase,
by the way, which is you find --
you take the things he throws
that you and turn it
to the subject you
want to talk about?
AMY WALTER: Well, we will see, I
think, in this debate at how
successful some candidates
are.
I think you're right, that Carly
Fiorina is really honing that
message to be able to come
back at Donald Trump. And I'm
sure every single other
candidate is trying to find that
one
really good turn of phrase
to get back at him.
The hope is two things among
Republicans, one, that he just
sort of jumps the shark,
to use a TV term, that he just
-- it just becomes something of
a bore, that -- his doing
this over and over again. And
the second is that they are
going to turn it to their
advantage,
one, by saying, I have a cute
quip to come back to you, but
also we're going to talk
about some of the policy issues,
specifically calling Donald
Trump out as not being true
conservative, calling Donald
Trump out for not really having
any depth of policy.
GWEN IFILL: Even though there
are no polls that seem to show
that...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: That that
is actually working.
GWEN IFILL: That that
AMY WALTER: One interesting
thing aside, too, about the
Carly ad, just to show the new
era
that we're in, in campaigns,
that's actually a super PAC ad.
And the reason that you see
she's not talking to the camera
is because she can't. They can't
coordinate, with the rules.
SUSAN PAGE: They
can't "coordinate."
GWEN IFILL: "Coordinate."
There's lot of air quotes this
election year.
OK, so, quickly, what are you
guys watching for in this
debate? Who are you watching
most
closely and what would you
like to see come out of it?
SUSAN PAGE: The lead in this
debate is going to have Donald
Trump's name in it. There's
no way it doesn't. What does he
do? What do others do to him?
And this idea that you can call
him out on policy or say he has
not been a consistent
conservative, people don't care
about that. They care that he's
somebody who is going
to break the china, get things
done. They think the system is
corrupt, the government
doesn't work. Why not go with
somebody as unexpected as Trump
to shake things up?
AMY WALTER: Well, and that is
the question, is that, will it
last over time?
I think this is what voters are
looking for today. Is that going
to be the same thing
they're looking for in October,
in November, in December, as we
start to get closer to
voting time?
But I think I'm also looking to
see if Scott Walker and Jeb Bush
can improve their performances.
They're both seen as sort of
lackluster. They didn't really
get a strong message out. It's
not just about pushing back
against Trump. It's showing who
they are, why they want to
be president.
GWEN IFILL: And whether Ben
Carson can take advantage of
this latest surge which he's
also enjoying.
AMY WALTER: Absolutely
true, absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: Amy Walter,
Susan Page, as always.
AMY WALTER: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: See
you debate night.
When the Ebola epidemic spread
through West Africa last year,
the focus was on the human
toll of the virus.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien looks at the
controversial race to develop a
vaccine,
this time with animals in mind.
With Ebola thinning their ranks
in Africa, 10 captive
chimpanzees in Louisiana are
enduring
one last medical experiment
focused not on human health,
but, rather, the survival of
their species. They are
receiving an experimental Ebola
vaccine.
PETER WALSH, University of
Cambridge: I don't really like
to see chimps in a cage. It kind
of upsets me a little bit. But I
weigh the individual welfare of
those chimpanzees against
the survival of
wild chimpanzees.
MILES O'BRIEN: Disease ecologist
Peter Walsh is a leading a
controversial effort to
vaccinate
wild chimps and gorillas against
the deadly Ebola virus.
PETER WALSH: It killed, I would
say, roughly a third of the
gorilla population and a bunch
of chimpanzees. We don't have
good numbers, but we know, from
based on how much area it
affected, we're talking about
a third of the gorillas.
KENNETH CAMERON, Wildlife
Conservation Society: You could
say that Ebola has decimated
portions
of the great ape population.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kenneth Cameron
is a field veterinarian with the
Wildlife Conservation
Society based in the Republic of
Congo. We met at the Bronx Zoo,
which is run by the
WCS.
Over the years, the virus has
wiped out entire local
populations of apes, 10,000 to
15,000
fatalities at a time.
KENNETH CAMERON: I don't think
that anybody really believes
that Ebola virus is going
to result in the extinction of
western lowland gorillas or
central chimpanzees, for that
matter. But what it may do is
reduce the populations to such a
degree that the other threats,
such
as excessive logging, habitat
loss and hunting pressure, may
finally lead to the demise of
the species.
MILES O'BRIEN: With the stakes
that high, Peter Walsh believes
the end justifies the
means in this case. We met him
at the University of Louisiana,
Lafayette, New Iberia Research
Center, the largest primate
testing facility in the U.S.
Captive trials make it easier to
limit the variables and apply
strict scientific controls
to an experiment.
PETER WALSH: There's no free
lunch. And the cost of lunch
here is that we're going to
do vaccine trials on captive
chimpanzees in order to save the
ones in the wild. That's
the trade-off. And that -- it's
a messy world, you know? That's
just the way it is. If I
could do it without doing the
captive trials, I would do it.
But I can't.
MILES O'BRIEN: But there is a
lot of heated debate about
whether it is necessary to use
captive chimpanzees in
this vaccine trial.
Brian Hare strongly objects.
BRIAN HARE, Duke University:
This is a Hail Mary. They are
hoping that this could launch
a new way to do research
with chimpanzees.
MILES O'BRIEN: Hare is a
professor of evolutionary
anthropology at Duke University.
He works,
and plays, with apes in Central
Africa. He says the vaccine
experiments should be conducted
there, in ape sanctuaries, where
the animals live in relative
freedom.
I think they are just taking
advantage of a bad situation in
Africa to continue to get
funds that they desperately need
to pay for infrastructure at
their essentially arcane
laboratories. We can also go and
do all of the types of research
that used to be done
in laboratories in the United
States. We can do it now in
these sanctuaries.
So, I think the question really
is not whether research needs to
be done, but where it needs
to be done.
PETER WALSH: The facilities here
are comparable to a hospital, a
human hospital. That's what
we're dealing with. We go to
Africa, we don't have that. It
endangers the animals.
MILES O'BRIEN: Medical testing
of any kind on chimpanzees has
long been a source of emotional
debate. The vaccinations we
witnessed occurred in the same
facility where this
gut-wrenching
scene was captured, one of many
like it recorded during a
nine-month undercover
investigation
by the Humane Society in 2009.
Andrew Rowan is president and
CEO of Humane Society
International. He spoke with us
in
2012.
ANDREW ROWAN, President and CEO,
Humane Society International:
What we found was that, frankly,
well, a lot of suffering and
conditions that we felt were
inappropriate for chimpanzees.
And so that's why we sort of
came out and said, this is --
this is ridiculous.
MILES O'BRIEN: Jane Fontenot is
the head of research resources
at New Iberia.
JANE FONTENOT, New Iberia
Research Center: There were
things I would have definitely
preferred to have been done
differently. It's research. It's
not always something that
everybody
wants to see.
MILES O'BRIEN: And, in fact,
they wouldn't let us see them
anesthetize the chimps in
this study, instead releasing a
brief clip showing a single
compliant chimpanzee receiving
an injection.
MAN: Good boy.
MILES O'BRIEN: We did get a
brief tour of the sprawling
facility. In addition to the
230 chimpanzees here, there are
more than 6,000 other primates
used in medical research.
Managers here say they have
learned some hard lessons, and
the animals are treated
humanely.
JANE FONTENOT: They will not be
harmed. After the study is done,
they will go back into
their social groups. And it will
have no long-term effect, other
than they will have antibodies
against Ebola.
MILES O'BRIEN: Vaccinating wild
animals is not an easy task. But
it is not unprecedented.
Vaccines protect buffalo at
Yellowstone from brucellosis and
stem the spread of rabies
in wild raccoons and foxes in
the U.S. and Europe. In fact,
the safety and success of
bait laced with the oral rabies
vaccine gave immunologist
Matthias Schnell the inspiration
for his vaccine.
A researcher at Thomas Jefferson
University, he wondered if a
tiny piece of the Ebola virus
could hitchhike on
the rabies vaccine.
MATTHIAS SCHNELL, Thomas
Jefferson University: What we
did is actually putting in one
Ebola
gene which encodes for one
important protein to get an
immune response against the
virus.
MILES O'BRIEN: They are racing
to get all this done before
September 14, when a federal
rule goes into effect that will
eliminate medical research on
captive chimpanzees in
the U.S.
But there is one loophole:
Experiments on chimps can
continue if the goal is the
preservation
of the species itself. New
Iberia must seek and obtain a
special permit from the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service in
order to continue this
experiment. They have not made a
decision
whether to apply.
Researchers would like to expand
the trial beyond 10 individuals.
But maintaining 230
chimps just for this one purpose
may not make sense financially.
RAMESH KOLLURU, University of
Louisiana, Lafayette: Certainly,
that is part of the calculation.
But this is one of those rare
opportunities that I believe we
have, as a research university,
as a community of scientist and
researchers, to give something
back.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ramesh Kolluru is
vice president for research at
the University of Louisiana,
Lafayette.
RAMESH KOLLURU: For us, this is
a great way of saying thank you
to chimpanzees for all
that they have done to
help improve human health.
MILES O'BRIEN: If it all ends on
the 14th, what happens to the
research? Is it all for
naught?
MATTHIAS SCHNELL: For now, it's
really off, and we can't do what
we like to do. So, we
can't do any follow-up studies
until it's approved. So,
hopefully, that will change.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Schnell hopes
he can gather enough data and
make his vaccine stable without
refrigeration in time for Peter
Walsh to begin distributing oral
vaccines among a half-dozen
gorilla groups at two sites
in Africa in early 2016.
And they will also assess a
technique to test for the Ebola
antibodies in the chimpanzees'
feces, essential to judge the
success of vaccinations in the
bush. If all goes well, Walsh
will
keep pushing for mass
vaccinations of wild apes.
But is that level of human
intervention appropriate?
PETER WALSH: The problem is,
we're intervening in so many
other ways there in a bad way
that
we really -- it's a moral
imperative that we actually
intervene in a good way
sometime.
And -- and vaccination is a way
that we can intervene in a good
way.
If we don't do this, we're going
to lose our closest relatives.
MILES O'BRIEN: There are still
big questions about how to
vaccinate wild apes and if it's
a good idea. But thousands of
humans have now received
experimental Ebola vaccines,
with good results. So, in this
case, humans may, in some small
way, be the guinea pigs
for the chimps.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," New Iberia,
Louisiana.
GWEN IFILL: Just over a year
after the city of Ferguson,
Missouri, exploded in unrest
after the killing of Michael
Brown, an unarmed black
teenager, by Darren Wilson, a
white
police officer, a local
commission today released a
blunt new report.
Focusing on race, inequity and
history, the 16-member Ferguson
Commission issued 189 calls
to action, including
improvements in police
practices, education, housing,
and health
care access.
"What we are pointing out," the
commission concluded, "is that
the data suggests, time
and again, that our institutions
and existing systems are not
equal, and that this has racial
repercussions."
Joining me now to discuss the
report and its possible impact
are commission co-chair the
Reverend Starsky Wilson, and
Missouri State Senator Maria
Chappelle-Nadal.
Thank you both for joining us.
So, call to action, Reverend
Wilson. What was the single most
surprising and the single
least surprising thing that
you found in this report?
REV. STARSKY WILSON, Co-Chair,
Ferguson Commission: Well, thank
you for having us on.
First, quite frankly, the most
surprising thing was that so
many people lived in enclaves
of comfort without understanding
that folks just five, 10 miles
away live in Third World
circumstances when you talk
about health outcomes, life
expectancy.
It was surprising to note that
there is a $15 billion cost in
our regional gross domestic
product for these racial
inequities that we see in our
community. It was surprising to
note that we are 42nd among the
top 50 metropolitan areas in the
nation in economic mobility,
the capacity for a child to
do better than their parents.
And so, with those surprises, I
was shocked a little bit as we
went throughout the process
as this -- that there are so
many people of such goodwill to
be able to come around these
issues when they came to know
about the issues, when they
recognized the challenges, to
actually
be a part of the process.
And so we're pleased that the
process, this bold experiment
and inclusive democracy has
produced a result in this
report, in these
recommendations. And now it's
time to aggressively
pursue them through activism,
advocacy and agitation, quite
frankly, of power structures
that can make them happen.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Maria Nadal,
was this -- were the findings
here about the structure
of way the city, the state, the
region is structured, or is it
about something more
profound than that?
MARIA CHAPPELLE-NADAL (D),
Missouri State Senator: It's
absolutely about how this system
is structured.
And let me just tell you, Gwen,
what we're dealing with right
now is the fact that
African-Americans
are at the bottom of the
economic food chain. They're in
the mud. They're right alongside
catfish in the Mississippi.
So we have to do something
that's different. We have to
really look at how our system is
structured. Yes, we have been
looking at racial inequity for a
very long time, if you look
at President Truman's freedom
from fear. We were looking at
racial inequity in 1968, when
you had President Johnson
looking at inequity in the
Kerner Commission.
And 47 years later, we're still
talking about racial inequity,
which means we still have
environmental inequity, social
inequity, economic inequity. And
so because all of these things
still are existent and around
means that there is something
fundamentally wrong and flawed
in the structure in which
we are operating right now.
GWEN IFILL: Reverend Wilson, let
me tell you about two things I
found in the report that
surprised me. One is that there
is a 40 percent difference --
40-year difference in life
expectancy
based on what zip
code you live in.
And the other is that 75 -- that
black motorists are 75 percent
more likely to be pulled over
than motorists of the majority
race. I -- those things surprise
me. So what do you do about
that? What does the commission
report do to address those kinds
of issues?
REV. STARSKY WILSON: Yes. The
commission report calls for
several things, particularly as
it relates to policing.
It calls for us to upgrade to
make more robust our racial
profiling law in our state. It
calls for a database on police
incidents, so that we actually
have the data. That's
the great value of this
conversation, is that we have
accumulated some data to hold
people
accountable. That should be
happening in an ongoing way as
relates to police stops in
our state, so we can see where
inequities lie geographically
and demographically.
The application of a racial
equity lens to the various areas
of the report is one of
the things that we think should
be happening with legislation at
every level. But, ultimately,
this takes us back to what
brought us here. It brings us
back to this issue of police
accountability and
oversight, police training.
And so we have made a call as
far back as April, actually, to
increase the required
training under the Peace Officer
Standards and Training
Commission in the state of
Missouri
for officers in counties of our
size that they should go from 41
required hours to 120
required hours in mandated
training in use of force,
cultural competency and officer
wellness.
We're pleased to know that the
commission -- that the
post-commission is moving
towards
that. And with a December 1
deadline, we look forward to
hearing more about that. But we
need to see more police
accountability and oversight
moving in Saint Louis County, in
other areas throughout our
region, as it has been won in
the city of Saint Louis over the
course of the last 12 months,
after folks have been fighting
for it, quite frankly,
for more than 25 years.
GWEN IFILL: Well, Senator
Chappelle-Nadal, picking up on
that point, you are an elected
official. You know the
difference between
recommendation and
implementation. How tough
will it be to take the next
steps called for in this report?
MARIA CHAPPELLE-NADAL: Well, I
have to tell you, I actually
pre-filed a lot of this
legislation
last December.
When it comes to body cameras, I
filed that. When it comes to
ensuring that police officers
get proper training, I filed
that. Special prosecuting
attorney in these kind of cases,
filed that legislation.
Upholding our constitutional
rights, I filed that
legislation.
So I have been dealing with this
for quite a long time. We were
very, very close to passing
the deadly force law. As you may
know, Missouri is 30 years out
of compliance with the U.S.
Supreme Court decision in not
only 1985, but also 1989, which
is the upgrade on what our
deadly force is supposed to
look like legislatively.
So I'm going to continue
fighting for many of the
suggestions that were
recommended that
came out today. A lot of this, I
have already filed, but there
were some good suggestions
that I didn't file that I want
to follow up on, but I really
want to ensure that we are
looking seriously at this.
Literally, we have been talking
about racial inequity for
decades, and Starsky is
absolutely
right. It's going to take
agitation. And we cannot be --
succumb to different interest
groups that are out there who
are trying to water down this
movement, this change in the
system that is so needed right
now, so that individuals can
have trust.
Well, one of the things I
would follow up on, though...
GWEN IFILL: Go ahead.
MARIA CHAPPELLE-NADAL: One of
the things I would follow up on,
though, has to do with
the environment and housing,
as well as education.
I'm ranking member on the
Education Committee. I also
serve on my local school board
simultaneously.
And I feel as though the focus
just on early education really
was a short step. That's
low-hanging fruit, to invest in
early ed. But we have to focus
on children who are at
risk who are in middle school
and who are in high school who
potentially can end up
in the pipeline to prison.
The report didn't talk about
that. And there are other
environmental issues.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me ask
Reverend Wilson about, because
one of -- you call for
agitation.
The senator calls for agitation.
I don't think anybody watching
from around the country would
say there has not been enough
agitation in Ferguson.
What stops this report from
ending up on a high shelf
covered in dust?
REV. STARSKY WILSON: First, I
say to the senator, I wholly
agree with her, investment and
engagement
there in early ed.
What we have taken is a broad
approach to young people,
understanding that academics
are one indicator of their
well-being, but they're not the
only indicator of their
well-being,
and stage-appropriate
development is what we're
calling for in the report.
There's actually a very...
GWEN IFILL: But I really want to
ask you about that, the dusty
shelf idea, before we run
out of time.
REV. STARSKY WILSON:
Yes, absolutely.
So, one of the things that we
have done is made the report
shareable, clickable, digital
first, so that people can engage
around it, so that they can come
in and find a place
for them to work in this.
Over the course of the next
three months, we will be working
to find a successor organization
and intermediary to work toward
this common agenda by setting up
shared measurement systems,
assuring mutually reinforcing
activities from several actors
throughout the area, and working
toward driving continuous
communication, which will
include a policy strategy here.
GWEN IFILL: Reverend Starsky
Wilson, co-chairman of the
Ferguson Commission and CEO of
the
Deaconess Foundation, and state
Senator Maria Chappelle-Nadal,
thank you both very much.
REV. STARSKY WILSON:
Thank you for having us.
MARIA CHAPPELLE-NADAL:
Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Later tonight on
PBS, "American Experience" airs
the first half of a two-part
documentary on the life
and work of Walt Disney.
Here's a bit of it, a look at
the weeks of preparation leading
up to the 1955 grand-opening
of the original Disneyland
in Anaheim, California.
NARRATOR: Walt was down in
Anaheim almost every day. He
would walk every inch of the
construction site, barking
orders. "Move that gazebo. It's
blocking the view of the castle.
Can we make that lake bigger?
Move the train wreck 50 feet.
That tree's too close to the
walkway. How about moving it?"
Never mind it weighed 15 tons.
MAN: Walt was literally down
there every day, watching
everything, but never
distraught,
never negative, just urging
everybody on, exploring all the
ways how to fix stuff.
MAN: Walt is interested in every
blade of grass. He's interested
in every leaf on a
tree. He's interested in where
everything is placed. There is
not an attraction that
Walt Disney isn't
deeply involved in.
NARRATOR: Disney's constant
demands put the entire operation
behind the eight ball, as
did his stubborn insistence to
get Disneyland up and running in
a hurry. Six weeks from
its announced opening date,
panic was starting to set in.
The entrance plaza was not yet
landscaped. Main Street was
unpaved, the castle unfinished.
The Jungle Cruise boats were
moving, but the robotic animals
had yet to be installed. As
opening day approached, less
than half of the planned
attractions were ready to
receive
visitors, and members of the
staff were lobbying to push back
the opening.
Walt was uninterested in the
naysayers. He just kept pushing
harder. The construction
crew tripled in the final weeks
to 2,500 men, many of whom were
working 16 hours a day.
Costs climbed to more than $17
million, more than three times
the estimate made when
construction
began.
MAN: So many things were
finished at the last minute.
There was a plumbers strike in
Orange
County which was settled about a
day before Disneyland opened.
So, Walt had the choice
of finishing the bathrooms or
the drinking fountains. And, of
course, he chose the bathrooms.
"People can buy Pepsi cola,"
Disney explained, "but they
can't pee in the street."
MAN: Well, the interesting thing
about Walt, just before the park
was getting ready to
open, he was so excited, like a
proud father. Look what he's got
now. That was Walt at his
best, his enthusiasm of pursuing
where he wanted to go, and
everybody was just going
to follow him right along.
NARRATOR: The park was a bustle
the day before the opening.
ABC was setting its cameras and
running rehearsals for the next
day's broadcast, which was
planned
as the biggest and most
ambitious live telecast ever.
One work crew was frantically
trying
to dig out the 900-pound
mechanical elephant that was
sinking into the Jungle River.
Another
was adding lead weights to the
front of the train engine to
make sure it didn't tip
backward.
Painters were settling in for an
all-nighter. Walt himself put on
a mask and helped spray-paint
backdrops for the 20,000 Leagues
Under the Sea exhibit. He was
still at Disneyland at
3:00 in the morning, walking the
grounds, barking orders. "We
need new murals for the
trains. Get me an artist."
GWEN IFILL: Tune in to watch the
entire "American Experience" on
Walt Disney tonight on most
PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online: a look
at Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish new
year, from columnist Wendy
Thomas Russell. The holiday
began last night and continues
through tomorrow, followed next
week by the Jewish day of
atonement, Yom Kippur. What
makes this time of year so
important?
We have a primer on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And we will be back right here
on Tuesday, when we talk to
Germany's ambassador to the
United States about tackling
the refugee crisis.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen Ifill.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.